The Joe Rogan experience. Um, thanks for being here. I really appreciate it.
I am super, always happy to come. Well.
We've been talking and we've been talking about, uh,
immune systems and this is one of the main things that I wanted to talk to you
about. Like,
what are the strict cause is all we're hearing is shelter in place where I'm
ask, don't touch anybody, don't go outside,
but we're not hearing what can you do to strengthen your immune system?
And I think that as a public health public service, you know,
a health thing, this is, uh,
one of the most important things that I think you can really focus and
concentrate on.
And an actual thing that you could be proactive about during this weird time.
Yeah. Well, definitely I think focusing on, on, you know,
lifestyle factors that you can, you know,
possibly modulate your immune system and strengthen it is, is important.
What's interesting is that the immune system, you know,
after doing just so much, of course, the past, like couple of months,
I've been nothing,
but like reading about the immune system and trying to understand, of course,
this new virus SARS cov two. Um, but I've just learned so much,
uh, you know, over the past couple of months, I'm not an immunologist,
I'm not an infectious disease expert. So, um, you know,
while I've had some training in immunology, I definitely, you know, didn't know,
don't know everything there is to know, but what just, you know, doing some,
some reading about like, why are people's immune systems so different? Like,
that's, that's the big thing. Like when you take like a young population,
as you get older, your immune system does decline. I mean,
there's lots of changes that occur, but like in general,
like people have different immune systems.
And what's interesting is that there's been tons of like genetic studies done on
like, you know, identical twins and they're followed over time.
And what's found is that genetics is not the major regulator of immune function.
Um, it's something in the environment and what, this is what surprised me.
And I know it's not totally gonna answer your question, but we'll,
we can totally get to that. But the main,
one of the main things besides age that regulates immune system is like previous
exposure to viruses. Like, so I thought that was really interesting.
And in particular, one, one virus, the cyto medic megla virus CMV did,
you know, like between 50 to 80% of the us population, has it like,
at least by the time they're like an adult, how's it permanently or has it,
it's a, it's a herpes virus. So it's,
it's a lifelong thing and this is why it basically, so it, it,
it changes your immune system. What are the symptoms of it?
Most people that are healthy don't ever know they have it cause there's no
symptoms. Yeah. Unless you're immunocompromised,
but most people that are healthy, they don't know, you know,
that they're infected with it. Say it again, what is it?
The cyto megalovirus it's CMV sounds like something Godzilla fights.
There it is. So what's so interesting,
but here's the interesting thing about this virus is that it,
so this is one of the major things multiple studies have been,
have been looking at, like, you know,
just immune variability and it's like CMV been identified in multiple studies.
And the thing that, the reason it got me interested in it, cause I was like 80,
almost 80%. I mean, I could have it. Right, right. Totally have it. Um,
and uh, it changes the immune function.
It's totally different between young and old. So,
so when you're younger and if you have it, uh,
it actually enhances immune function. So there they've done studies where like,
they, they, they have, um, given people, influenza vaccine,
and oftentimes these vaccine studies are used to kind of test the immune
response and like how your, how robust your immune responses, because you're,
you're given a vaccine and there's all different types of vaccines, you know,
pieces of an antigen or all different types of, you know, ways that you can,
you can expose someone to a bacteria or virus, but, uh,
you have a response to it. And the response is, uh, you know,
involves your adaptive immunity.
You make what's called neutralizing antibodies that, you know,
basically eventually bind to the virus and neutralize,
it prevented it from entering the cell. So people that have CMB that are young,
have a really robust response to the vaccine, much better. Um,
but older people have the complete opposite where it's like, you know,
deleterious.
And the reason for that scientists think is because basically
this virus it's,
it's stuck with you lifelong and kind of reactivates every few years.
And like every time it reactivates, it kind of trains your T cells,
which are part of your immune system to, to become focused on that CMV.
And so as you get older, your,
your T-cell population becomes more focused on fighting that virus and less so
on other viruses that you're exposed to.
But this virus doesn't have any symptoms.
Both healthy people don't have any symptoms with it. I know it's really like,
it's really weird. So what I'm wondering,
and the reason I'm even like going here, and it has nothing to do with,
you know, taking vitamin C or zinc,
and we can talk about that stuff and vitamin D but I just thought it was so
interesting because we hear all these stories in the news where, you know,
some people are asymptomatic, some people are, you know,
then some people are just really getting, you know, hard hit. And,
and these people let's say they're more age matched. Right.
We know that elderly people are more, um, prone to severe form,
but it just made me think what if this, you know, previous,
previous viral exposure to something like CMB is,
is kind of like also kind of shaping people's immune responses in some way,
surely people are going to be looking, looking at that.
But I just thought that was a really interesting thing to come across, you know?
And then the other sort of on the same,
on the same law along the same lines as previous, you know,
previous virus exposure is like something that really seems to be something that
is a main regulator of how people, like, what, how you're immune, you know,
what your immune response is, you know? And so, so.
You mean by how many times you've caught the flu, how many times you've heard,
whether you hit your chicken.
Respond to it, you know? Yeah. I mean, like you, if you get the flu,
is it going to not is like a three-day kind of thing or is it going to knock you
out for two weeks kind of thing? Right. That's what I mean. Right. So, um,
I mean, if you, if you get a sample,
like there's been these Ciro surveys where they basically, um,
that just means they both get a sample of plasma and look for different
antibodies, viral antibodies, and they'll find at any given point,
a person has like antibodies against 10 different viruses, just randomly,
you know, so you're, you're constantly being exposed to viruses, you know,
you're not always, you just don't succumb to them, right.
You're not always getting sick. And so, um, you know,
like another really interesting kind of thing is like,
you know, there's, so the SARS cov two virus, um,
is part of a family of, of Corona viruses called the beta coronaviruses.
So SARS, cov one,
the VAR virus that was responsible for the original SARS outbreak in 2002 or
something, the mayor's one in the middle east.
And then there's two different ones that are responsible for the common cold.
Now coronaviruses are only responsible between like 15 to 30% of common cold
cases. So it's not like the common cold is, is the illness you get,
but there's lots of different viruses that can cause it.
But what's interesting is that there's been studies showing that these two beta
Corona viruses that are responsible for some of the common cold cross-react
with. Um, so there's one that cross-react with the SARS cov one,
which has a very, it's very, um,
the sequence is very homologous to SARS cov, two virus. And,
um, it's also been shown that the SARS cov one,
the antibodies against the SARS cov one can neutralize the common cold one.
So there's like cross immunity happening between these other viruses. Right.
And so, um, th and there's been some studies by the CDC, uh, on,
on SARS cov two, where they found basically, uh,
that people that are infected with SARS SARS,
cov two also boost their antibodies against the common cold one.
So, you know,
there's there certainly I think a good hypothesis to be made that
potentially, you know, one or two of these common cold viruses could,
the antibodies you make against them could also somehow maybe, maybe, you know,
interact with the SARS cov two virus potentially neutralize it. I mean,
that's a big open question that seems possible. Um,
without we don't have any answer to that, I think we will, like, there's large,
there's large scale, uh, Ciro surveys being done.
I know at least three that, um, think his name is Dr. Michael Bush,
she's at UCF. He's like, he's, he's doing like really large, um,
surveys where they're, they're,
they're going to be analyzing Sierra from people from like, you know,
blood donors and stuff,
and like following over the course of several years to see, um, you know,
just basically understand more. So.
What is the speculation,
if there's any sort of uniform speculation as to why when you hear about prisons
where a lot of these prisoners,
I don't know if you've seen that there's a video going around where one prisoner
had, uh, SARS SARS, two COVID, 19, whatever,
and spitting into a cup and then passing it around to all these other inmates so
they could all get it so that they get released. So these,
because they're releasing people, especially California, which is so wacky,
they're releasing sex offenders,
and there's been some really high profile releases of these horrible people that
should be in jail probably forever. And they're releasing them. It's like,
it it's really disturbing,
but what would cause other than something like that,
what would cause all of these prisoners to not just be positive,
that makes sense. But to all be asymptomatic,
is there any speculation as to why large these large groups,
there was another one that was a meat packing plant where most of the people
were asymptomatic as well?
I wasn't, I wasn't aware of the meat. Plaquing one being asymptomatic. Um,
but I did read about the one in prison and it was like blowing my mind. Like,
what's like, what's going on? Like, that's insane. It's kind of like,
you read these stories. So, so this is like,
there's one thing that it's important to keep in mind when we say asymptomatic,
like, you know,
there's asymptomatic in like a person that never actually gets symptoms. Right.
And then there's asymptomatic. So there was a study done at the CDC,
I don't know, a month ago, maybe a little more where they measured, like, uh,
they did it, they did this nasal pharyngeal swab test in, in a nursing home,
70 something people. And, uh, 13 of them, uh,
tested asymptomatic. Like they had no symptoms, but they tested positive.
But then they went back a week later and 10 of those people had symptoms and
three re symptomatic. So unless like, there's another,
like if you test someone and they're asymptomatic at that time of testing,
they could be pre-symptomatic right. In other words,
like you have to go back a week later and see if they have symptoms,
because that that's really important. So, so let's say even, you know, you know,
60% of were asymptomatic. Like,
I don't know if they went back and tested a week later if it was just like a
single time, but that's what, that's what,
this is what got me thinking about this whole thing was, you know, in,
in the prisons and jails, I mean, they're in close quarters and there,
you got one virus that someone's exposed to and they all get it. Right. So like,
what if there's, I don't know the CMB, you know, percentage there,
but what if the coronaviruses are going around there? What if, what if,
you know, some, some common cold coronavirus has gone around and that, you know,
those antibodies that they've made to neutralize that coronavirus beta
coronavirus are somehow helping with the SARS cov two, like,
I would love to see that tested.
Do you know now immunize.
Uh, people did vaccinate people when they go into jail. I was trying.
To figure that out as well, because like the tuberculosis, tuberculosis, um,
one of the types of vaccines they do for TB,
I think they do it in like Japan and some other countries where they've got a
really low, um, death rate. And so they're kind of, that's a test,
that's a clinical trial. That's now going on where they're trying to test,
but I was trying to figure out, is there a vaccination? Yeah.
Cause I would imagine it would be simple for them to do that.
You're entering into prison. Just vaccinate you just to.
I couldn't come to an answer. I was, I was searching for that the other day.
I was trying to figure that out, but I think that's also a really good, I mean,
there's a ton of theories, right? I mean, it's just,
you could go on and on and on, but the whole,
the thing that I just think that I would like to see more research,
and I'm just hoping, you know,
that that CDC and other people are investigating these, these other,
the cross in unity, right? Like if there's,
if there's antibodies that you're making against another Corona virus,
beta Corona virus is in the same family as this Sarge one, no,
one's had Sarge one in the United States, you know?
So like that one doesn't that that's not as relevant as, but the common cold,
you know, that's, that's very common, right? So, you know, if,
if 15 to 30% of the common cold is composed of Corona viruses,
we know at least two of those coronavirus are in the same family that have been
identified to make, at least in one case there's been neutralizing antibodies.
So there has been crossed immunity, then you'd think why, why not test that?
Let's get some animal studies started on that, you know.
And of animal studies.
There was an article that I was reading yesterday that was saying that they're,
they're hoping that they've found some antibodies in llamas that
they're hoping they're going to be able to, because of the,
see if we could find this, um, because of these antibodies and llamas, they,
they they're hoping they can either transfer them to people or learn something
about how these antibodies are created. But llamas seem to be heritages.
Lamas could be the key to fighting new coronaviruses research says make that
larger. It says, uh, it may sound bizarre to most,
but Lamas could be the key to finding new coronavirus researchers from Belgium.
Oh, that remember that's the big lady that I was showing you earlier.
She's the health lady and the United States published an article this week in
the journal cell that highlights the potential use of llama antibodies to
prevent COVID-19 infections antibodies from a four year old Belgian Lama named
winter show promise in blocking Corona virus from infecting cells.
According to research from the university of Texas Austin,
the national institutes of health and the Ghent. I said that Ghent,
G H E N T university studying early forms of the coronaviruses researchers
found an antibody in winter that effectively attached itself in neutralize
spike protein in SARS cov one and MERS, cov, uh,
researchers believed the particular antibody,
which has been found in other Lamas as well,
can be injected into an uninfected individual to protect them from getting
infected with the new Corona virus. That's very interest.
Yeah. So there, I think, you know, there's, there's lots of avenues for,
you know, therapeutics and, you know, in addition to like repurposing drugs, um,
monoclonal antibodies, you know,
being able to basically identify antibodies that do neutralize SARS,
cov two virus, whether they come from Lamas or humans and, you know,
and basically identify the specific antibody that can bind to that spike
protein that you just mentioned, which is, um,
that region it's known that the antibodies bind they're neutralized. It,
it's also the region that, that is used to get inside of the cell. So, um,
monoclonal antibodies, I think are a really big, um, you know,
possibility for a promising therapeutic because you can then, I mean,
the problem is growing like large scale manufacturing them, right? So like,
if you can identify these antibodies and then manufacture them,
you can inject them in people and then potentially get some protection.
The problem is,
is that that's not like it's going to be a short lived protection.
Like it's going to be, it's not like you can,
it's not like a vaccine where your body's making its own antibodies and they're,
and they're more longer lived, you know?
So in areas where people are going to expose,
perhaps you could give it to them and it would stop them from getting,
but how long would you say short-lived?
Well, we don't. No. I mean, how so it's, you know,
it's probably enough to PR like if you're a healthcare worker, your first line,
you know, health, you know,
first responder people that are definitely like being exposed
to large doses of the virus, um, that,
that could be a promising area,
but also I think even just treating patients like that have already been
infected, you know, so that's, that's also another,
so like in combination with some of this other stuff, like from desert vere, uh,
which is, you know, it's not like a silver bullet,
but it seems like it's also promising,
promising probably with combination of other, other factors as well. Um,
but yeah, the mono monoclonal antibodies is a really,
I know there's like Regeneron is a big company they're, um, they're,
they're growing some large scale ones. I think there's a, they,
they isolated from humanized mice or something,
but there's other companies that have isolated from humans that have been
infected. Uh, so, you know, that's, that's definitely, um,
a promising area for sure. And the, a good thing about that is that, um,
have you heard of antibody dependent enhancement? Do you know?
So that's a big concern. Um, all right. So,
so basically when you, when your body is exposed to a pathogen, like a virus,
your, your innate immune system, you know, the first line of defense,
like neutrophils,
things like that are making hydrogen peroxide trying to kill the virus,
but then in the background, your adaptive immune system,
and I'm just totally generalizing is, you know, is,
is also working in the background. And, you know, part of that, uh,
an adaptive immune response is, you know, to produce antibodies.
So you have memory B cells that are making antibodies that are specific to bind
to different regions, epitopes on the virus and neutralize them,
prevent them from getting inside of the cell. Um, and so, uh,
that adaptive immune system usually takes about seven days after you're exposed
to the virus. Right. Um, the problem is, uh,
antibody dependent enhancement.
So sometimes a neutralizing antibody is an antibody that can bind to the virus
and neutralize it, stop it from entering yourself, right? So you're,
it's doing its job,
but you sometimes make antibodies that are non neutralizing or don't do as good
of a job. They don't bind as tight or something. And, um,
then you can have what's called antibody dependent enhancement.
And this was like a big problem for all the RSV vaccine. Um, back in the,
you know, like most kids get RSV, it's a respiratory tract infection.
The most kids get it by the time they're two, uh,
like there's no vaccine that that's given. Uh,
back in the sixties, there was, um,
this antibody dependent enhancement happened in some clinical studies with
toddlers and some problems got really, really sick and a couple of died.
But what happens is basically the antibody binds to that.
There's a couple of things.
The antibody binds to the virus and can basically change its confirmation and
allow the virus to get into the cell better. So then you become like, you know,
you get like a higher viral load and then you don't have antibodies to
neutralize it. And it just, you know, it could be more, it could be,
it could lead to death. Um,
the other thing that happens is the antibody binds to the virus.
Doesn't neutralize it,
but it like makes us crazy immune complex that like activates your immune system
to just go haywire. And it causes all sorts of pathology.
And that's what happened with the RSV toddlers.
So there's a few viruses that this happens with. And unfortunately,
coronavirus is one like this has been identified with the SARS cov one, um,
virus. And I think marriage as well where, um, uh,
so this is also a problem with vaccines. So like people like giving,
giving the vaccine people's immune response, um,
some people can have that antibody dependent enhancement,
and that's what was shown to happen with these, with the SARS cov one,
there was some non-human primate studies that, that did that. Um,
and also, uh, animal studies as well. So, you know,
Mon the thing with monoclonal antibodies is they're a little more specific cause
you know, they neutralize and you're like growing them up.
Like you've done all that test as opposed to just letting your immune system do
its thing. And then potentially, you know,
you may have this like non neutralizing antibody that, um,
could cause problems, but that's kind of the concern.
And I know that the vaccine,
people that are working in vaccines are working on that and it's like,
they're concerned about that and completely trying to like figure that all out.
Wow.